# Dwarves

## History

The first dwarven clans are thought to have formed some twenty thousand years ago as dwarves and humans began learning about agriculture and began forming groups for safety and trade. Over the next ten thousand years of prehistory, humans and dwarves would begin to battle over resources and land, with dwarves eventually settling in hilly and mountainous areas. While humans enjoyed fertile lands in river deltas and valleys, dwarves were forced to live in areas more inhospitable to agriculture, and it was during this long-forgotten time of prehistory that dwarves began using terraced farming to keep up with their growing and developing clan-based civilization.

Since the beginning of their history, dwarves have always venerated their ancestors, worshiping them and their great deeds so they would carry on through time. The earliest magics of the dwarves were based on this ancestor worship and calling the spirits of the past to help them when needed. Around 5000 BW, the Old Gods began rewarding their followers with spells, and the worship of Mau and Durgin began to flourish, with smaller numbers of dwarves worshiping the other elemental deities as well.

Dwarves generally consider the year 2250 BW to be the start of their civilization and rise from barbarism as they began to form major clans and began to expand the small cave and mine systems that had become more common in many larger dwarven surface towns. These early dwarven settlements grew and spread through the northeastern part of Nigal. As clans increased in size and allegiances were made, tensions would rise over rulership and land rights. The Gormdawi of the north wanted to extend its newly-formed Dwarven Empire's reach far to the south to encompass the Bryndawi, and within a few hundred years the Dwarven Wars would begin, in the year 1921 BW. These wars, mostly fought in the central region of mountains and hills that formed the border of the two dwarven peoples, were a violent and bloody affair. Raging on for decades, it seemed that there was no end in sight for the Dwarven Wars.

The fortuitous arrival of Mordrion in 1866 BW would herald a new era for the dwarves. This entity that had enjoyed the worship of dwarves in another universe seemed to have impeccable timing in its arrival, and Mordrion quickly began to appear to dwarves in many of their most populous cities, declaring that the dwarven race needed to be unified and that he had arrived from another world to help them. By 1849 BW Mordrion had helped the dwarves broker peace, and from that time forward dwarven holds and towns would expand, gain knowledge of rare and challenging metals, learn how to create masterful arms and armors, and grow traditions and clans for another eighteen centuries as they solidified their embrace of the mountains and valleys of Nigal. The Dwarven Empire flourished in the northern lands, and the more independent city-states and dwarven holds of the south kept their independence while remaining loyal to dwarvenkind. The worship of Mordrion also replaced the veneration of Mau and the elemental gods as the dominant deity for dwarves over the centuries, although many dwarves still worship Dirgin to this day.

All would change when the War to End All Wars began around 3 BW. Dwarvenkind was unprepared for such a large invasion of orcs and goblins, and before the end of the war, dwarves would see most of their holds overtaken and have most of their numbers wiped out. In fact, during the time of the War, dwarves would suffer more losses than any other race. Ironically, the War did establish the new capital of the Dwarven Empire as well as decide the lineage of the new royal family that would rule over dwarvenkind. Dwarves would battle for decades to retake their holds as all the races became more reliant on one another. The "Common" language would soon develop and dwarves would form closer bonds with the races they had fought against for so long. During the next eight hundred years, dwarvenkind would continue to develop and grow across the mountains of Nigal. Trade continued to flourish as demand for dwarven weapons and armor increasingly grew. Alliances with non-dwarves continued as the insular ways of the past began to fade, and the worship of Mordrion spread to other races. Now, eight hundred years after the War, dwarves have a well-developed and mature civilization stretching across thousands of miles of mountains and hills.

## Society

Dwarven life is based around a clan-based structure, with family and past ancestors being of incredible importance. Before the time of the Old Gods and now Mordrion, dwarves worshiped ancestor spirits. Although Mordrion commands the worship of most dwarves today, all dwarves feel a connection to past family members and can often engage in dissertations about their lineage and the accomplishments of their progenitors. Honor is also very important to most dwarves, similar in some ways to the honor-based human civilizations of the Ejiin off the southeastern coast of Nigal. Along with family and honor, dwarven society values hard work, tenacity, bravery, and loyalty.

Dwarven society can be split into two distinct groups - traditionalists and independents. Traditionalists are dwarves that want to preserve the old ways of life and honor, and who revere clan and lineage. They look at the allegiances with non-dwarves as matters of necessity, to never be fully trusted. To them, the Dwarven Empire is the foundation of their clan-based life, and allegiance to it helps society survive. The independents, on the other hand, are dwarves that want to integrate with other races, worship other deities, and set out into the world to find themselves. They find honor and tradition outdated relics of past eras and prefer to have their freedom to make choices and not be tied with blind allegiance to those in faraway lands. Although both traditionalists and independents can be found among both dwarven races, a slight majority of Gormdawi are traditionalists while a sizable majority of Bryndawi are independents.

Dwarves are the unquestioned masters of metal arms and armors in Mazariim. None of the other races can compare to the great master smiths of the dwarves, and dwarves hold almost all the territories where rare metals can be found. It is important to remember that dwarves originally developed on the surface of the world, not in caves as dwarves from other settings do. Although dwarves now have extensive holds and underground sections of their cities, all of the food needed in dwarven holds comes from the surface. Since they live in such rugged and mountainous areas, they long ago adopted a system of terraced farming to help feed their populations, with the sides of mountains near their holds carved out in a staircase fashion.

Almost all dwarves worship Mordrion, the patron deity of dwarvenkind. His temples can be found in every dwarven town or hold, and the clergy of Mordrion is often advisors to clan elders and jarls and kings of holds. Although less common, some worship of Dirgin and Rivoleen, and even Tiovin, can be found in some parts of the dwarven lands, especially the more independent southern nations.

## Gormdawi (Mountain Dwarf)

**Favored Regions:** Northern Dwarven Mountains

**Favored Deities:** Mordrion, Dirgin, Mau

**Language:** Rhundawi, Common, Dal'Rhundawi

Gormdawi are the Dwarves that developed in the northern mountain ranges of Nigal. They have darker colored hair and eyes, with shades of blacks, browns, and deep blue common for hair and eyes of brown, blue, and purple to be found. Most wear long beards and hair and are most often well-groomed. They usually stand between four and five feet tall and are stocky and hardy people.

The history of the Gormdawi dates back to the times of interracial wars with Humans. After settling in the mountains and developing for a time, the Gormdawi would begin to coalesce into clans, which one by one began to show allegiance to a central king. Soon the Dwarven Empire was born, and almost all of the dwarven settlements in the northern parts of the Dwarven Mountains would soon have sworn allegiance to this new and unified empire. Unfortunately, the Dwarves in the mountain ranges to the south, lawless and strange with bright red hair and tan skin, did not want to be ruled by any king, let alone a new one a thousand miles away. War began to brew between the Dwarven Empire and the lands to the south, and soon the Dwarven Wars would commence. Mordrion's arrival would quickly bring peace to the hostilities, and the Dwarven Empire would begin to solidify itself as an orderly and unified nation. Slowly roads both above ground and below would start to string the Empire together, enabling both trade and communications via runners and prosperity began to grow, even in the somewhat harsh conditions of the mountains of Nigal.

After the crushing losses of the War, Dwarves would struggle to come back. The Gormdawi had to fight some ferocious battles to regain their holds, infested with orcs and goblinkind for decades after the War had ended. Within a few decades, however, the Dwarven Empire would grow, led by the clan that had helped win the War. Time would pass and paths between holds became roads as the Empire grew, now strengthened with trade with Humans to the west. Over the centuries inventions like steam power and advanced engineering would help the Gormdawi become a prosperous people, interacting and trading with the Madronians and Sabonaar, and living somewhat peacefully with their neighbors.

Most Gormdawi lead an orderly life, respecting and practicing several traditions and regarding their family and ancestors in high regard. The Gormdawi of the north generally dislike disorder, which can bring out their gruff side quickly. A strong noble class rules through the king, with each hold ruled by clans related to the king or loyal by sworn oath. Many families can trace their oath to the Dwarven Empire back dozens of generations. Although all dwarves are individuals, many are lawful with a sense of honor.

The Gormdawi are known for several interesting inventions and traditions. Their prowess in engineering is unmatched, with the road system linking Graniteshield and the other metropolis-size dwarven holds unparalleled in their design. It is said that runners stationed every two miles can get a message across the nation incredibly quickly. Their ancestor tombs, oftentimes located away from their holds, are of unparalleled workmanship and underground design. Some of the most advanced mining techniques were invented by the Gormdawi, making prodigious use of steam power in both excavation and transportation of ores. The Gormdawi are also the inventors of rune magics, long ago perfecting many ways to store and release spells using various runes on both places and people. Finally, the development and spread of coffee can be attributed to its early cultivation high in the mountains, a boon that is enjoyed in almost every Madronian café to the west.

## Bryndawi (Hill Dwarf)

**Favored Regions:** South Dwarven Mountains, Gnomish Realms

**Favored Deities:** Mordrion, Dirgin, Iquinias, Mau, Pyrantor, Quarzel, Rivoleen, Tiovin, Vuleala

**Language:** Rhundawi, Rhunurbar, Common

Bryndawi are the dwarves that developed in the southern and far eastern mountain ranges of Nigal. They have varying shades of red, blonde, and light brown hair, with light green, light blue, hazel, and brown eyes and varying skin tones, usually tans and golds. Although some wear large and thick beards and hair, many others shave their beards and heads completely or have small patches of hair in varied shapes such as what we would refer to in our worlds as a "Mohawk". They stand between four and five feet tall and are stout and hardy people.

The history of the Bryndawi is quite different than that of their Gormdawi cousins. From early on there was an independent streak in the Bryndawi, and they never fully took to having a centralized leader. Their early wars were not with Madronian progenitors but rather with the Chak'ti horse riders and Mespoian savages. Gnomes, however, were an early ally of the Bryndawi, and they together began to stave off their enemies and grow as a people. Soon, however, aggression would come from the Gormdawi to the north, and the southern clans would prepare to defend their lands. Early on they suffered losses to their dark-haired cousins, their smaller armies no match for the unified forces of the Dwarven Empire. Soon, however, the arrival of Mordrion would bring the Dwarven Empire to the bargaining table with the Bryndawi, and lasting overall peace would be established.

Able to now focus on their other human enemies, the Bryndawi would soon focus on making peace with their neighbors, taking the example from their own experiences with dwarves. Their sense of honor meshed well with these more primitive human races, and eventually, mutual respect would keep the Bryndawi and their Chak'ti and Mespoian neighbors in their territories. The War would be devastating for the Bryndawi as it was for their northern neighbors, bringing destruction to many Bryndawi holds. Over time, the Bryndawi would reclaim most of their former holds and trade and interact more with their neighbors, and work their way back to a prosperous yet fragmented collection of city-states and regional confederacies.

The lives of Bryndawi can vary greatly, with no real set of customs or solid caste system in place. Different holds and settlements have different traditions and expectations, and Bryndawi holds are oftentimes influenced by the other races that live nearby, such as the gnomes, Chak'ti, Varkonans, and Azala. Many lead chaotic lives, always traveling or on the move, and the lawful and regimented ways of their northern cousins are cherished by few in the southern lands of the Bryndawi. Bryndawi religion varies greatly around the regions they inhabit. While the veneration of Mordrion is still above other deities for many, a much larger number of secondary deities are prayed to as well, including Dirgin, Iquinias, Mau, Pyrantor, Quarzel, Rivoleen, Vuleala, and even Tiovin.

The Bryndawi, separated from their northern breather for so many centuries, developed many fascinating advancements and crafts. Their use of astrology and numerology in magic is renowned, used by many sages and diviners across the world. Their predilection for the worship of elemental deities also led to great strides in elemental magics, both divine and arcane. Bryndawi also have a predilection for tattoos, which transformed into a type of tattoo magic with both Bryndawi and Chak'ti origins. Finally, the Bryndawi were influenced by gnomes and their inventions a great deal over the years, although the costs of overly-technical inventions have prevented the mainstream use of steam and gnome tech to the degree of their wealthy northern cousins.

## Additional Notes

**Adamantium:** Unlike in standard Pathfinder settings, adamantium is not a metal found in meteorites, but rather an alloy made from several other rare metals including mithril, iron, and platinum, perfected over centuries by dwarvenkind.

**No "Underdark":** Unlike many other settings, there is no "Underdark", hollow world, or worldwide cave systems for dwarves and other races to inhabit to be found naturally. Underworld dwarven subraces, such as Duegar, are not to be found in Mazariim, and the few drow in Mazariim are descendants from a few families of drow that came to Mazariim with Eilistraee. Other underworld races, such as beholders, mind flayers, and aboleths, are actually from the nightmarish section of the Plane of Dreams known as the Far Realm
