# Alternate Material Planes

There are an infinite number of alternate material planes that exist in the Mazariim universe, each vibrating at a slightly different frequency, existing right on top of one another but completely oblivious to the existence of each other. Some are almost perfect copies with only tiny differences, while others are completely foreign, with strange alien life or even no planet Mazariim at all. Many are historically divergent, with some significant events in the world's history different and a tangent reality evolving from the difference. Other tangents can differ in terms of their biological (sentient apes fought in favor of slavery), cosmological (the Earth is a forest planet – nice for the apes), or fantastic (dragons burned the forests, ate the apes, and enslaved all of the humans) natures. Also important to remember is that each alternate prime material plane has its own set of extra-dimensional planes since they are formed by the "birth" of entities, save the Astral Plane. Below a few are described, but this information is exceedingly rare and would be considered out-of-character unless discovered in-game.

## Ta'Puh (Orc-dominated World)

This terrifying tangent is the result of the orcs reigning triumphant during the War to End All Wars, with all of the other races killed or subjugated as slaves or horrifying twisted abominations altered by the orc's experimentation and magics. Ta'Puh roughly translates as "orc kings" in their language, and it is fitting for them.

The orcs from this strange historically-divergent reality are very different than the ones who live in the shadows and barren lands of Mazariim. When they conquered the humans, elves, and dwarves of their world some 800 years ago, they quickly spread and multiplied, absorbing knowledge from their new slaves and quickly advancing in their understanding of all things both mundane and magical. They have created huge cities on the ruins of the old empires, and have enslaved and domesticated the other races into perverse and abominable versions of their former selves.

Some 400 years ago, the Orceri sages and adepts learned of the existence of alternate realities, and slowly developed the ability to see, and eventually enter, these other prime material planes. With new lands to now rule over in the name of Zuel, the Orceri soon began to march into several worlds ill-equipped to stop these intelligent and resourceful orcs. With each world, the Orceri gained more resources, slaves, and space with which to expand, as well as new knowledge that was unknown in their own homeworld. Now, some 400 years and 11 alternate realities conquered from when they began their inter-dimensional conquests, the orceri have unintentionally discovered the world of Mazariim. After a powerful invasion force entered our plane, a group of heroes sealed off the tangent from all other parallel Mazariim worlds.

## Drakaii Colonization (Dragon-dominated World)

The strange and immensely magically powerful Drakaii were a civilization that lived on the moon of one of the four planets in the Mazariim solar system, a moon around a planet much further from the sun but with a thicker atmosphere. Eons ago and thousands of light-years away, a star went supernova and emitted a tremendous gamma-ray burst that happened to collide with their moon, stripping away the entire ozone layer and letting ultraviolet radiation wash over the planet, killing all life over a few weeks. The Drakaii had foreseen this, however, and magically transported the survivors of the disaster to another habitable home in a different star system. A few of their kind came to Mazariim and became the progenitors of modern-day dragons, changing their strange alien form (multi-eyed five-armed lizardman-dragonish archmages and dimensional wanderers) to that of dragons and evolving into the dragons we know today. In a tangent reality, however, the Drakaii instead came to Mazariim, and influenced the development of the other sentient races, making them well-cared-for slaves and servants, domesticating them and making them loyal and obedient. In this bizarre and tragic tangent, all of the five main races are the pets of the ancestors of dragons.

## World of Gaia (Reincarnation World)

Long ago, the entity Minerva came to Mazariim and became the patron of the elves, coming down and helping their development for thousands of years until the present day. In an alternate tangent, however, Minerva did not favor the elves, but rather favored all of the sentient creatures of the world, taking the place of what would be Tiovin and Taovan, blocking and absorbing other magical energies at every turn, preventing any other entities from commanding the resting place of the souls of sentient beings. Instead, Gaia (the different name Minerva took) never actually absorbs the souls of the fallen, but rather reincarnates them after an indeterminate amount of time. Because of this, all of the inhabitants of Mazariim have lived many lives, with specific magics designed by mages existing to bring out these memories and past lives, thereby creating a very enlightened world where death is not feared and few are ignorant or judgmental.

## Ygrath Domination (Swords and Sorcery World)

The time before the arrival of Minerva is often thought of as pre-history, a time of scant records or knowledge. Much of the arcane mastery of humans comes from this ancient past, from a confederacy of human villages and towns that would be located in the Inner Kingdoms today, thought to have been first settled around 4000BW, before the arrival of Minerva. Named Yrugas, the nation was born when a group of dragons began to teach humans in the area how to wield arcane magic. A number of the humans, including a fledgling wizard named Madron, would quickly learn and develop into capable spellcasters that would soon flex their magical might, challenging the traditional primitive social structure that had the leaders of the elemental cults and Mauians as village elders. The rule of the human mages was barbaric and inhumane, and it is thought that many of the monstrosities that run amok in the darkest parts of the world were experiments from this time. Many of the wizard spells used throughout the world today date back to this time. Madron, whose name now reflects his power in the name of an entire people and language, was one of the rulers for some 900 years.

In the prime timeline, this civilization fell around the time of Tiovin's arrival, in 2700BW, due to infighting and power struggles. In this alternate timeline, however, Madron saw that his empire would fall without his guidance and rule, so he sought immortality, becoming a lich and eventually ascending to a minor entity through the absorption of mana into his form. He soon expanded his territory, taking over most of Nigal before embarking on various crusades against Dragonkind, the Dwarves, and eventually the entire Elven continent. In the end, the Yrugrassian mages ruled the globe, restarted the ley-lines, and even destroyed a few entities. The world is now a dark and sinister place where mages rule through tyranny across the globe, a place with no justice or law, just survival.

## Akovarian Trans-dimensional Hub (Trans-dimensional World)

One of the oldest cultures of Mazariim was Akovar, a civilization on a far-off continent that mastered magic and ley-lines through dragons thousands of years before the rest of Mazariim. Around the year 6900BW dragons attacked and destroyed Akovar to try and gain the power of the ley-lines for themselves. In this alternate timeline, however, the Akovarians beat the dragons, continued to develop, and became a trans-dimensional hub for extra-dimensional and alternate-reality travel and commerce, dwarfing the other civilizations on the planet, including enslaving the elves and dwarves of Mazariim, exporting them as slaves to other strange worlds.

## Gnome Colonization (Steampunk World)

In an alternate prime very similar to our own, the War was won by the side of good as it was on our own, but one of the main reasons was because of the gnome Goombala Jambalaya, a brilliant inventor that took steam power to a whole new level. His inventions, including steam tanks and airships, help turn the tide against the orcs in the War. As time progressed, the gnomes began amassing a great deal of power, using leverage and their technology to either take over areas or control them through manipulation. In this alternate timeline, the Empire of Dammarth rules most of Nigal in a somewhat benign way, with the entire continent awash in steampunk technology, including flying vehicles, powered weapons, advanced tanks, mecha suits, and weather manipulation.

## Far Realm Infiltration (Horror World)

In this sad alternate prime, during the aftermath of the War the entity Zorancon sent his many minions into the world and slowly gained control of the major surviving settlements through infiltration, mind control, and shapeshifting. After a few decades, the population was low enough that the aberrations of the Far Real could show themselves, keeping the sentient main races and thralls, food, and playthings. Elder brains rule over the planet as they send their agents into far away alternate planes and universes to spread their realm of control.

## Galactic Creators (Spelljammer World)

Long before other entities formed, the entity Mau decided to change the way the universe evolve, for some inexplicable reason that only a higher-dimensional entity could understand. Seeing all of space and time at once, he changed several habitable worlds across the galaxy and stimulated evolution, each planet eventually having one of the many Mazariim races as the predominant race. As other entities formed, Mau put limits on the extra-dimensional planes that formed so that an entity could only influence one planet. Hence, across the galaxy, there is a planet of humans, elves, gnomes, dwarves, halflings, mind flayers, beholders, dragons, neogi, orcs, and giants to name a few. Mau also limited the ability of teleportation magics so that teleporting between planets was not possible. The spelljammer helm was eventually developed on these planets, a magical enchantment that allowed ships and aircraft to brave the void of space and reach other planets. Each planet has vast fleets of spaceships and wars in space over territory and resources are commonplace.
